WOODRUFF: now, the Trump
administration has set a lower
refugee limit for the U.S. for
this fiscal year.
In the coming week, the U.S.
will hit that ceiling of
accepting 50,000 new refugees.
The city of Utica, New
York, has long taken a
more welcoming approach.
One out of every four citizens
there is a refugee and the
evidence is they're helping
revitalize the community.
Paul Solman has our update.
It's part of his weekly
series, "Making Sense".
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
PAUL SOLMAN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT (voice-over):
Post-industrial Utica,
New York, upstate,
downtrodden, and, in the heart
of downtown, where the United
Methodist Church used to
be, a thriving mosque.
In the world beyond Utica,
the tide of refugees rises,
the fear of foreigners swells.
Muslim terrorists, real
and imagined, haunt us.
TRUMP: Donald J. Trump is
calling for a total and complete
shutdown of Muslims entering
the United States until our
country's representatives
can figure out what
the hell is going on.
SOLMAN: President Trump's
calls for even a partial Muslim
ban were repeatedly rebuffed
in court, but the Supreme Court
has now let some of it stand
until it considers the ban's
legality this fall.
But when we asked Utica
Mayor Robert Palmieri
if the city would be
willing to resettle Syrian
refugees --
MAYOR ROBERT PALMIERI,
UTICA, NEW YORK: I would say,
absolutely, we would be, because
Utica starts with you.
It's as simple as that.
SOLMAN: There's the humanitarian
aspect, of course, America's
historic promise to extend
a hand to huddled masses
yearning to breathe free.
But Utica likes the economics.
PALMIERI: They're
willing to work and they
work extremely hard.
It's the rebound
for our great city.
SOLMAN: Refugee resettlement as
an economic development tool,
a Rust Belt revival strategy
Utica has pioneered.
After decades of decline --
the city lost a third of its
population when its factories
closed -- Utica is growing
again, back up to 62,000 people,
thanks in part to its reputation
as, quote, the town that loves
refugees, who now make up one
out of every four residents.
Thousands are Muslims from
Bosnia, refugees of the
war there in the 1990s.
SAKIB DURACAK, BOSNIAN
WAR REFUGEE: Basically,
we left everything what
we have at that time
and start from zero again.
SOLMAN: Sakib Duracak,
who trained in Bosnia
as a construction
engineer, started a small
business in Utica rehabbing
cheap, often crumbling,
houses for refugees
looking to build a new
life.
DURACAK: A huge opportunity,
because, at the time when we
came in Utica, it's a relatively
very dead and poor city.
SOLMAN: Bosnians have
visibly spruced up Utica's
east side and beyond.
But there's an even more
basic reason to welcome
refugees to a town like Utica.
ELLEN KRALY, COLGATE UNIVERSITY:
To have an economy, you have
to have workers, and you
have to have consumers.
SOLMAN: Professor Ellen
Kraly teaches demography at
nearby Colgate University.
KRALY: The influx of refugees
to Utica allowed us to retain
some smaller industries that
were looking for
highly motivated labor.
SOLMAN: And if past suffering
helps fuel motivation, Thada
Paw has plenty to spare.
THADA PAW, KAREN REFUGEE:
I work very hard because I
want to live American life.
SOLMAN: An ethnic Karen,
a persecuted minority
in Burma, she spent 23
years starting at age
four in refugee
camps in Thailand.
When she was 14 --
PAW: Burmese army, they
just shoot our refugee
camp and make it burn.
My sister's best
friend, she burn alive.
SOLMAN: A week later,
her 17-year-old sister
committed suicide.
PAW: I think she tired of life.
Whole, our life, we have to
run, run, run, run for safety.
SOLMAN: Paw came to Utica nine
years ago, worked as a nursing
home aide and housekeeper
while studying English, then
as a medical interpreter.
Four years ago, she
joined the direct sales
firm Mary Kay Cosmetics.
Within months, she'd
worked her way up to the
coveted pink Cadillac.
PAW: I travel in
Albany, Buffalo.
It's really hard, but
now I love to live here.
SOLMAN: OK, so we get why
refugees for Utica, but
why Utica for refugees?
IBRAHIM ROSIC, BOSNIAN WAR
REFUGEE: Utica was close to
Syracuse, and Tom Cruise is from
Syracuse.
So I thought I was
going to see Tom Cruise.
SOLMAN: Sadly, for Bosnian
refugee Ibrahim Rosic,
no Cruise, happily,
the Mohawk Valley
Resource Center.
SHELLY CALLAHN, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, MOHAWK VALLEY RESOURCE
CENTER: We receive $1,125
federal to be spent on behalf
of each arriving refugee.
SOLMAN: With those dollars,
says executive director Shelly
Callahan, the refugee center
rents an apartment, furnishes
it, gets the utilities turned
on, and starts teaching the
basics.
CALLAHAN: So, it's how to lock
your door, how to work the
stove, the thermostat, the
plumbing.
SOLMAN: There are
also English lessons.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Is somebody
sitting to the left of you?
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Left?
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Yes.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Right?
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Left, right.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: You
have got to shop around.
SOLMAN: Introductions
to strange new foods.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Celery.
We're going to make
celery and kale.
SOLMAN: And for those who
can drive, the all-important
class in parking tickets,
a veritable auditorium
of Babel.
But within a few months,
they're on their own.
CALLAHAN: They actually come
here owing their airfare back
to the federal government.
So, they are expected to get
a job as soon as possible.
SOLMAN: Although there are no
hard statistics on how many
refugees do or don't find jobs
after their aid ends, some
qualify for public assistance.
Ibrahim Rosic was literally torn
apart in the Bosnian conflict.
ROSIC: In 1994, I
stepped on a landmine.
I lost my left leg, and my
right leg was severely damaged.
I have no knee.
I can't bend it.
SOLMAN: He is officially
100 percent disabled, but,
says the former engineer --
ROSIC: I work two jobs.
I work full-time as a
director at Mohawk Valley
Community College, and I
also work as an adjunct
instructor at SUNY Poly.
I am not a burden
on the community.
on social services.
Yes, community helped
me to get this, but now
it's my time to pay back.
And I would say most
refugees do the same.
SOLMAN: So, are refugees the
economic boon that motivated
immigrants famously have been?
Yes, says economist Jeffrey
Sachs, but there are negatives.
JEFFREY SACHS, ECONOMIST,
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY:
Some workers face
increased job competition
and their wages
can be driven down.
If lower-skilled immigrants
come, then lower-skilled
American workers may
see a decline in their
wages, whereas business
owners may see more workers
at lower cost for them.
SOLMAN: And what if, as
many Americans fear, even
just a few are terrorists?
Shelly Callahan's response?
This isn't Europe.
CALLAHAN: Refugees are
the most intensively
screened immigrants
really to come to this
country, about two years
of intense scrutiny
by the Department of
Homeland Security, the
FBI, ICE, Department of State.
There's DNA testing involved.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: For those
people who is proven as bad
people, we don't want them here.
SOLMAN: The al Saad family,
Palestinians who for decades
lived in Baghdad, fled during
the troop surge of 2007, the
deadliest year of the Iraq war.
YOUSIF AL SAAD, PALESTINIAN
REFUGEE: I got kidnapped there
by, I don't know, some militia.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: One
of my other brothers, too.
AL SAAD: My other brother.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:
They beat him up.
AL SAAD: He got beat up.
I lost many friends of mine.
SOLMAN: They spent three years
in a camp on the Syrian border,
before being cleared for
transit to the United States.
Yousif al Saad went to work
at the Chobani yogurt plant
outside Utica, whose CEO, Hamdi
Ulukaya, has championed
the rights of refugees and
hired hundreds of them.
We were supposed to tape there,
but at the last minute, Chobani
pulled out, citing security
concerns, fear for the safety
of employees in the current
political environment.
Understandably, as right
wing media had targeted
a Chobani plant in Twin
Falls, Idaho, where
some 30 percent of the
workers are refugees.
ALEX JONES, INFO WARS: So,
let's look at the headlines.
SOLMAN: According to
conspiracy theorist Alex
Jones, citing Breitbart --
JONES: TB spiked 500 percent
in Twin Falls during 2012 as
Chobani yogurt opened the plant.
Idaho refugee boys admit to
sexually assaulting 5-year-old.
OK.
Twin Falls refugee rape
special report: why
are refugees moving in?
Oh, the Chobani plant.
SOLMAN: But the sexual assault
by minors is shrouded in
secrecy, and the TB case spike
was from one positive test to
six, in a nearly 12,000 square
mile area that included twin
falls, none of the cases
contagious, none involving
Chobani employees.
JONES: This isn't
some game people.
There's a total Islamic
takeover taking place.
Behind the scenes, they got
Muslims following me around.
SOLMAN: In April, the
company sued Jones for false
and defamatory reports.
JONES: And I'm ready
to take them on.
Christ, please help us win this.
Please help me be strong.
SOLMAN: The following
month, Jones issued an
apology and a retraction.
JONES: On behalf of Info Wars, I
regret that we mischaracterized
Chobani, its employees
and the people of Twin
Falls, Idaho, the way we did.
SOLMAN: Two final follow-ups:
unemployment in Twin Falls
has dropped from 7 percent to
3 percent since Chobani
came to town in 2012.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Please
remain standing for the
Pledge of Allegiance.
SOLMAN: And the Trump
administration is seeking
to cut the number of
refugees allowed annually
into the U.S., from
110,000 to 50,000.
CROWD: With liberty
and justice for all.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Let's
have a round of applause
for our new citizens.
(APPLAUSE)
SOLMAN: Last February in Utica,
Yousif al Saad joined 29 others,
from 15 different countries
in becoming a U.S. citizen.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:
Congratulations.
Your new flag.
SOLMAN: Almost
all were refugees.
We leave the last word to
Judge David Peebles (ph).
DAVID PEEBLES (ph), JUDGE:
America is now your country.
I cannot overemphasize the
need now, more than ever, for
you and your fellow citizens
to unite, answer the call
and assist in bettering
our society and our world.
Congratulations on
becoming a citizen of the
greatest nation on Earth.
God bless all of you
and God bless America.
(APPLAUSE)
SOLMAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour", this is economics
correspondent Paul Solman.